At the risk of sounding uh heretical
here, I am not a huge believer that
consumers at all are very sensitive to
these changes in the in the policy rate
in the Fed funds rate. Even though the
standard model works through their inter
temporal consumption savings decision, I
think most of the evidence is very weak
that they care about that. And then the
credit card, I think, on top of that is
really makes this clear because if
you're paying 23% and you are the kind
of person that wants to to borrow, how
much is a half a percent going to matter
to you if the Fed hikes? Plus, you could
have been getting a much cheaper rate
anyway and that didn't compel you to go
looking for it.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLot Podcast. I'm Jill Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, are you
good about like frequent flyer miles and
hotel rewards and cash back and using
your credit card to get like good seats
at the US Open like all the or dining?
Are you good about maximizing that
stuff?
>> Nope. I am not. Um I'm trying to be
better. You know, I'm finally signing up
to a bunch of frequent flyer programs
and things like that, but in general, I
am not a uh a point strategist. Some
people get really into it.
>> I know I do not. I do. I have a very
busy life. I do not have mental energy
towards, you know, maximizing points or
learning about the newest cards. Like,
oh, is this card worth a $400 fee
because I can get upgraded to platinum
faster this year? I not want to think
about that stuff. I'm not that
interested. But I get the impression
that like that means I'm probably paying
for someone who is or something like
that. Or maybe, you know, I'm paying
these fees on my credit cards or these
interchange fees, etc. Maybe I'm leaving
money on the table by not doing that. I
don't know. I find credit cards to be a
weird business. Like I don't really know
what Visa does relative to say the bank
that issues a Visa card, etc. I don't
know how they slice the I don't know
anything about credit cards.
>> It's a very opaque business for sure.
It's a weird business. I would say like
it it's competitive, but also it's like
not that much, you know, like everyone's
kind of doing the same thing in many
ways. So, we should talk about it. It's
also, I imagine, kind of sticky in the
same way that deposits at banks are
sticky. We spoke with Joe Abate about
that a while back. So,
>> some people cycle through them a bunch
and stuff like that. And there's so much
credit card advertising. I don't know
what's good or bad or whatever. I just
look, I use my credit card as a payments
card because I don't really I don't
carry a balance from month to month. So,
I don't I don't know anything about
interest rates or whatever. I pay it off
at the end of every month because I just
basically use it for payments, etc. So,
I just don't know much about them, but
they're a huge major consumer financing
source and everyone's talking about
fintech and BNPL and all these other
things and stable coins and all this
other stuff. And it's like, yeah, but
the big one, who's talking about the big
one? Credit cards.
>> Well, that's the thing. So, points have
become a bigger attractant, I guess, uh,
to credit cards. And so people are
spending more with their credit cards
and carrying a bigger balance, which
means that the rate that you're paying
on the credit card is actually more
important potentially than something
like your mortgage rate.
>> Totally. Well, very pleased to say we do
in fact have the perfect guest, someone
we've had on the podcast before. Um, we
I think last time we were talking about
Red Q, which is bank lending in the 70s.
I like uh his work because he goes back
to the simple things like let's just
talk about how this works. Let's talk
about how this works because I think we
move on too quickly without sort of
understanding the basics. Maybe there
are stones left unturned. Literally the
perfect guest, Idomar Drexler. He is a
finance professor at Wharton and he was
the co-author of a fairly recent paper
sort of looking at the question of why
are credit card rates so high? Because
if you actually do borrow from them,
sometimes the rates like 20 something%
seems way higher than any other sort of
uh lending. So, thank you so much for
coming back on OddLots.
>> Thank you very much. It's uh it's really
nice uh to be back. Thank you for having
me.
>> When I was doing some prep for this uh
episode, there is not a ton of actually
like fresh academic work on the credit
card industry. There's not a ton of
papers, but it's this huge space. Why
did you see a reason to go back and
revisit the sort of basic simple
question of looking at interest rates on
credit cards?
>> Yeah. So uh my interest is usually uh
like we talked about when I was uh here
last time is monetary policy macro and
and a lot of banking um and I had some
students who are co-authors now you know
on this paper come and wanted a couple
years ago want to talk about fintech
because fintech is is a very popular
topic and then I was thinking well how
do we sort of analyze fintech and what's
the potential uh room for fintech to
grow if we don't really understand how
the dominant incumbent players, the
credit card uh banks uh work. And then
we look at this and I was very surprised
to see something kind of simple, which
is that the return on assets for credit
card banks are just way higher than the
average bank. So bank ROAs are
typically, you know, 1 1.2%, they move a
couple basis points. Very exciting. Uh
uh credit card banks ROAs in and you
know, most banks are not just credit
cards. So, so it's actually even higher
than this are in the 3 and 1/2 often 4%.
So, I was very shocked by this. Okay,
how come it's so high when it's so hard
to squeeze out a couple basis points and
then you know one of the reasons is just
they charge really high rates like okay,
how do they get away with this? You
know, what is going on here? Just very
simple question about how to decompose
that rate into the pieces and kind of
what's left over at the end.
>> Okay, so lots to talk about in the theme
of or in the spirit of starting at
basics. walk us through the revenue that
credit card issuers or credit card banks
are actually earning the different types
and who the players are in the system.
>> Yeah. So um so let's separate first into
two categories. One are people who
revolve their balance and that's what
most of the papers about because I think
that's the more interesting part and
there's more details and it's kind of
the banking part of it. Uh and there are
actually a lot of people who revolve. Uh
often I find people are surprised to
hear this but uh about 60% of the credit
card users actually revolve. So meaning
that they don't pay in the grace period
at the end of the month and so they're
hit with these uh very high usually
interest charges. And then the other
part are you know what people call
transactors. So they're the kind that do
pay during the grace period. So they're
not uh paying interest. Okay. So for the
revolvers um you there's again multiple
parts. So you pay interest on the
balance that you have but before then
there's the part where which applies
both to the transactors and revolvers is
when you swipe the card then there's
immediately a percentage taken people
call it the swipe fee and that is split
up into a bunch of pieces. Uh so one of
the ones that I used to be aware of that
most people are aware of is the co is
the card network like Visa, Mastercard,
MX, there was Discover um which is now
part of Capital One and that's you know
there's a whole menu but basically it's
like 15 20 basis points. Okay.
>> Okay. Uh doesn't sound like a lot but
there's like 10 trillion dollars of
purchases between debit and credit
cards. Turns out when you take 20 basis
points of 10 trillion dollars kind of
adds up. nice business if you can get
it.
>> It's really nice. Actually, you'd be
surprised that usually Visa and JP
Morgan are the two most valuable uh
financial services firms. They change
who's number one. So, Visa's, you know,
been worth over $600 billion. It's a
lot.
>> Yeah.
>> So, um and Mastercard's gigantic, too.
Uh so, there's that. Then the majority
of that swipe fee, the rem the majority
of the remainder there actually goes to
the bank that issued the card to the
consumer. So that's called interchange
fee. And it's again there's they don't
make this like very easy to tell, but in
our data it's it's a little over 1.8% on
average. I think it's largely been
trending up over time slowly. And so the
bank gets that. So actually gets the
vast majority of that and then they pay
your rewards and things from that. A lot
of that goes to just passes through to
the rewards and things. Uh and they keep
a small portion of it uh for themselves.
But the big part of their business where
most of the money comes from uh that we
analyze here is the is all these people
that revolved they pay an interest rate
and that interest rate now is on average
23%.
>> Wow.
>> Which is just was like a shockingly high
number. I mean, I guess I've seen that
it just when you think when you do when
you work on assets and like, you know,
think the kind of things you guys talk
about bonds and bonds pay, you know,
whatever, 5%. High yields, you know,
investment grade spread is not even 80
basis points. Now, on top of it, high
yield spreads under 3%. Like, how the
hell do we get to 23%.
>> Yeah.
>> When you hear this number 23%.
Yeah. And you think about the fact that
credit card users are sort of uh can be
decomposed into transactors and
revolvers, right?
>> My first instinct would be well the
transactors are very on the ball.
They're like not credit risks. I've
always been uh just a transactor. I've
never revolved. How much of that uh
increased spread can just be explained
by likelihood of default from the
revolvers which I presume are perhaps a
little more you know financially
precarious and maybe less financially
sophisticated
>> right so yes I think if you don't you if
like me you didn't know much about this
your assumption if I think if you ask
most financial economists they would the
first thing they would think is well it
must be that the rem most of the
remainders is uh charge offs right
defaults
And that's not true. So you you can find
that pretty easily. So the average
charge off rate on the re on the
revolvers. Okay. So when you look at it,
let's say you look it up online, you'll
see kind of, you know, relative to the
whole balance sheet. So includes both
groups. And like you're saying, by
definition, transactors don't borrow, so
they can't default. That's a bit that
kind of makes it go down a little bit.
But the majority are revolvers. So if if
we kind of clean that out, then uh on
average in our sample, it's uh 5.75%
of balances are charged off. So it's not
trivial by any means. It's that's a high
number, but again, we were talking about
18% spread. So if you think, oh, it must
be about 18% charge offs, it's not even
close.
>> And it's like never been that high. So
So you might think, well, maybe it's
just, you know, some that's on average,
but sometimes it'll spike to be
ridiculous numbers. It will it it does
spike but not for very long periods of
time. So the bottom line is it's not
that's a big chunk that's a substantial
chunk of it but not even close to a
majority of it. So you know people
default but they don't default that
much.
>> Can I ask one more question on APR and
the average there? Did you observe any
trend over time? Like did the rate
actually get higher you know as as time
went on? So that's something we haven't
spent a lot of time on in this paper,
but the answer to your question is this
is obviously yes. So if you look at it,
I think what can be found online is
again it's there's a bit of a I think
there's something a little misleading
there, but that has trended up pretty
strongly. I think not as much as if
somebody you know goes to their computer
and looks up let's say Fred, you know,
from the from the call reports what is
the average APR. It looks crazy. It
looks like it's gone up 10%. It's gone
up. We're we're going to get to the
bottom of like exactly how much. I think
it's gone up substantially since 10
years ago, let's say. Um that that trend
is clear. I don't think it's as much as
it looks like there, but yeah, it it's
been going up actually.
>> Okay. So, you've established default
rates for credit cards and as you said,
like this is this business is about
volume, right? So is there an argument
to be made that maybe if the world um
you know falls apart then you have lots
and lots and lots of consumers who are
defaulting but you know potentially at a
low rate of the total but the volume
makes it meaningful for banks.
>> I mean we are already looking at as a
percentage of of assets. So um that kind
of like valuates it takes it all into
consideration. I think the question like
in our minds was at first you know maybe
in a crisis something extreme happens in
a sense it does but this is already the
average default rate so usually it's
lower and then you kind of include this
in there so um we'll talk I guess a
little bit about risk premium which it
turns out to be very clear here and
important um but it's not in it's you
know just the average default rate is
what it is so it's not in expected
defaults again there it's surprising but
at the same time If if you just look at
where banks actually suffer default
losses in an in an average year, not a
crisis year, something like 50% of banks
default losses are actually coming from
credit cards. The thing is is that
they're not surprising. They're not
unexpected
>> uh losses. They're kind of the expected,
but it's still really big. And the
reason for that is even though credit
cards only take up about 5% of bank's
balance sheet, the charge offs or the
defaults on average bank assets is very
low. I mean know we have this impression
of banks as being these like you know
crazy like you know risk-taking lunatics
but actually I think the right way to
look at them is that their average asset
is extremely boring and low risk. They
do take a lot of leverage which is only
possible because the average asset is
extremely boring and low risk. But even
after all that it it's not their amount
of default is not really that high. So
if your average asset has about 40 basis
points average charge off and this thing
has over 5% then even if it's only 5% of
the balance sheet it it can act like
it's 50% of the charge off.
>> I also like other forms of consumer
borrowing right like people are very
assiduous about making their car
payments. Yes. uh making I don't know if
>> well up until recently
>> up until recently but historically the
perception was you people really
prioritize car payments right because
you that's essential to live and you
can't have your car repossessed home
mortgages obviously for obvious reasons
I imagine that a stretched household
will miss credit card payments are more
inclined to if they're going to have to
miss a payment it's going to be there
versus some of these other popular areas
of borrowing Totally. So the other ones
are secured and this is unsecured. So
>> you know that's in that sense this this
is an actual asset that's uh kind of
risky and interesting I mean from my
vantage point and that it's unsecured
lending to uh normal people. All the
rest of the stuff is secured like like
mortgage you know home homes are
obviously very important collateral cars
pretty much. So the rates on those are
much much lower in these. there's
they're nowhere near, you know, the
spread there is nowhere near as juicy. I
mean, when I teach students, we go
through like, you know, the hierarchy of
borrowing that the vast majority of
borrowing is secured. You have to think
it's crazy for a bank to come to
somebody with a medium or lower credit
score and say, "Here, have a line of
credit of like5 $10,000, you know, and
it's not that you can default on it. You
don't get shot for that. It's uh it's
part of the law. It's part of the game."
>> Yeah. I was reading a um an article from
Life in 1970 where they were talking
about how credit cards are becoming a
big thing and oh my god these credit
card companies are just mailing out
applications to Americans. It's like
giving sugar to diabetics. That was
their analogy. Speaking of unsecured
versus secured, I am also looking right
now at um a website that claims to have
invented the first credit card that's
based on your stock portfolio. So,
borrowing against your stock portfolio
with a card. I got to say the card does
look pretty nice. It's made of glass.
Maybe that tells you something.
>> What was I going to ask?
>> Intentional metaphor.
>> Yeah, exactly. Okay. So, if it's not
about risk premiums, if the rate isn't
compensating for something like default,
could it be compensating for all the
points and benefits that customers are
acrewing?
>> So, I take one sec. So, it's it's not
just compensation for expected default.
I want I want to separate that from the
risk premium. The risk premium is kind
of the competition for unexpected
default, which turns out to be pretty
big here, but let's go back and talk
about the the points and stuff. So, I
find that people care more about people
are more excited to talk about points
than anything. Uh the the term rewards
was really a marketing flourish. Um so,
yeah. So in total number of dollars um
this interchange was I mean again you
have to look at find exact numbers but
for credit cards alone I think it was
over $150 billion. So like the GDP of a
medium-sized country gets transferred as
as interchange maybe small country and
we find that about 85% of that gets
transferred through as rewards. You you
could wonder I think it'd be natural to
say what is the point of this? Why why
charge people
>> uh you know 1.8% and then pass through
1.57% as rewards where well at least
some people like I guess you and I Joe
don't pay that much attention. I'm I
think I have enormous amounts of United
Miles I'm never going to use um because
I have to actually travel to whatever
place to use them. Um so uh why is that?
I mean I think good economic question
and people have tackled this. I I do
think it creates a very strong network
effect. So, you aren't not actually
>> seeing a charge for this. It's the
retailer that has to eat it. And if you
do not uh use a card that gives rewards,
you're not going to get in most cases a
lower price. So, there's a whole series
of litigation and fights over the years.
Amazing. about what retailers can do to
discriminate uh you know prices based
people who using cards and current and I
thought a couple years ago the last
couple years I'm seeing more restaurants
give you back a percentage or not charge
you a percentage uh if you didn't do
that but it's it's it's a little bit
beyond my legal expertise to sometimes
understand these for the longest time I
can't remember which one I think you
could give people a discount but you
couldn't do a search charge
>> there was some like legal discrimination
between those things and as a result
people mostly don't pay attention to
that kind of thing. And so you you
really want to stay inside the network.
Uh and it kind of keeps you there. Even
if at the end it would be a total pass
through, it still helps for them to keep
this business.
>> You know, it's interesting. Um there's
this crypto company. Have you heard of
Blackbird?
>> Yeah.
>> It's a crypto thing and they have a
bunch of restaurants you sign up and
you're like pay in a coin. I don't know
exactly how it works, but I think
>> that they have to on some way because in
theory it would be nice like maybe we'll
get a little bit into stable coins as
like a payments rail in the future or in
this conversation and think it would be
a nice way to like circumvent this but
even they just I think implicitly have
to reinvent the rewards model to do it.
Maybe you get premium seats or you get
reservations etc. in order to sort of
like bootstrap a new network. you start
end up having to reinvent a lot of the
rebates and the benefits et etc that
come with the old network. Maybe we'll
get into crypto a little bit more but
talk to us a little bit more then about
like the persistence of this uh of this
spread that can't even that can't fully
be explained by default.
>> Yeah. So so the default like we said is
like a little under 6% then I'll just
I'll mention it. So these things do tend
to defaults do spike in bad times. So we
estimate using kind of the cross-section
of different FICO scores how much extra
compensation you get as you go to lower
and lower FICO scores in terms of extra
APR uh net of the defaults. So we
estimate that the risk premium there is
accounting for about similar size piece.
So um there's a risk premium about 5% on
average which is much smaller for let's
say you're an 800 FICO borrower. there's
not that much risk premium but if you're
a 600 FICO borrower the risk premium
goes up to like you know 9%. So we get
back to like what that mean. I think it
means something very important. I think
the person who's borrowing there may not
realize that they are paying a very
large risk premium. So if you're a low
FICO borrower and you aren't going to
default like you know you're not you're
paying a very high risk premium and that
is because other people default in bad
times and so you're you're go and even
if you do think you're going to default
sometimes I think one should realize how
much of a risk premium you're actually
paying for this. Um so but now let's go
back to something else before before we
uh maybe talk more about that is uh the
other pieces of this. So we talked about
interchange and rewards largely cancel
out leaves a little bit. It's not zero.
They do earn a little bit from it. Most
of the transactors what they make off
transactions is that difference because
transactors spend you know recurringly a
lot. Borrowers tend to kind of
accumulate and they don't have that much
more room to spend because they've
borrowed. So that's not a big portion of
the of the revenues there. Then there's
fees. That's another couple percent is
actually making the the puzzle worse.
And then the part that turned out to be
really big that surprised us is
operating expenses.
>> Um of which marketing, you mentioned
this turns out to be really big. And if
you this is the thing that I don't get.
So there is so much marketing for credit
cards and as I said like they're all
kind of similar in many ways and I
remember this was often the um like the
blockage for new entrance from the
fintech space trying to get into this
business. I remember talking to Lending
Club about this back when they were a
thing and they were spending so much
money on male advertisements and I just
don't get why that's the primary
acquisition channel and why it seems to
be so important to the business model.
>> Okay. So you I think you hit on like the
really um it's a really interesting
question. Maybe the answer will be like
people listening to this will be like
you know I knew that but and maybe they
did. So which is the reason you do it
because it works which means which by
wish I mean you could this goes back to
Joe's question. I think you can see we
look we do this analysis there that if
you spend more on operating expenses
which I think largely means additional
marketing because the actual operational
side of this apparently is very
expensive but there's big differences
across these guys in operating expenses
and I don't think it's because their
systems are like much more and we
actually see no relation between that
and default so it's once you control for
FICO so it's not about screening people
for better borrowers but what it is it's
very it's an effective apparently at the
margin uh acquisition strate customer
acquisition ition strategy. So you could
do to think the following thought
process. You could say, well, why don't
somebody just cut all this marketing out
and just charge a lower rate and that'll
get people
>> Yeah, that's that's your acquisition
advertising, right?
>> Apparently, it doesn't work. So So
people are not are not rate sensitive,
which is a recurring theme I'm starting
to get in, you know, learn when we talk
about we talk about banks and bank
deposit rates. people are they're not
completely insensitive obviously, but
they're not that sensitive to the rates
they get paid and they're not that
sensitive to the rates they get charged
on this. So, there are actually, this is
a surprising thing, the CFPB has a
spreadsheet. Well, when there are people
still working there, they used to have a
spreadsheet uh that they updated with
essentially every single card there is
and what the rate on it. And all the
cheapest cards are credit unions and
they're significantly cheaper, much
cheaper than your average credit card.
But I'm sure almost nobody's except
their customers have heard about them.
And it's cuz they don't advertise much.
And so and you say, well, if their rates
are so cheap, why don't people go there?
It's like they haven't heard about them
and they don't care that much about the
rate is my inference from this. So the
more you pay for marketing and operating
expenses in the data, the higher is the
average amount you're able to charge.
>> That's really funny. Does some of this
stuff repel the brain of the academic
economist? No, for real. Well, like this
idea that the borrower wouldn't be rate
sensitive, the idea that we're actually
paying more to be advertised to, etc.
because this is their cost. The idea
that there are lowerc cost options out
there and all we have to do is search
for them and they're available like
>> well also for macroeconomists
specifically, right? Because we talk
about benchmark rates and the importance
of how those feed into the economy and
here we are talking about the credit
card rate which is actually potentially
more important.
>> Yeah. Like I'm serious though like do
you encounter academics in this space
who think this cannot the idea rates are
high because to some extent consumers
just aren't paying attention to them
etc. Do you encounter people who think
no there must be something there must be
some variable you're missing because
we're rational and we would seek out the
lower rate.
>> I want to talk to people like you're
saying I haven't really had the chance
because you because you we tend you know
when you pitch this to a finance
audience not macro people and I am a
finance president then they're more
open. I mean, credit cards is the thing
in finance. People people like credit
cards, but I think the interaction with
macro and monetary
>> is really interesting. So, it doesn't
doesn't bother me because I think it's
interesting. I mean, I think it's kind
of bad that a lot of people who are
usually not in the best shape are
essentially adding 6% rate to their
credit card because they're paying for
the advertising that they responded to.
But, you know, that's, you know, you
could get if you didn't respond to the
advertising, you responded to the rate,
they would do that instead. But, but
they don't. So, uh, but in, you know,
think about, you know, you guys often
talk about the Fed lowering or hiking
rates. Um, at at the risk of sounding,
uh, heretical here, I am not a huge
believer that consumers at all are very
sensitive to these changes in the in the
policy rate in the Fed funds rate. Even
though the standard model works through
their intertemporal consumption savings
decision, I think most of the evidence
is very weak that they care about that.
And then the credit card I think on top
of that is really makes this clear
because if you're paying 23% and you are
the kind of person that wants to to
borrow uh I mean obviously because
you've borrowed uh how much is a half a
percent going to matter to you if the
Fed hikes plus you could have been
getting a much cheaper rate anyway and
that didn't compel you to go looking for
it. So I think I think it kind of puts
you know a big question mark over
whether that's really the channel which
which is a lot of people have said that
but it's still kind of the main way we
talk about those things.
>> Can we talk a little bit more about
competition? And again like why doesn't
someone just come in with a lower rate
and disrupt the entire business?
>> But this I I think to give you another
example to if you personal lines of
credit these were all new things to me.
I I I find this I think where you've put
retail people with the financial sector
you actually get a lot of explosions
there like weird stuff. So that's the
place where sort of academics should go
looking and many do but it's not the
place where I kind of having worked at
like hedge fund market maker ever
thought about these things. You don't
think about like the fancy people like
the the people who are sophisticated do
all the math but that's not they kind of
cancel each other out where the real
fireworks are is when you get into the
retail sector. And if you look at
personal lines of credit from the same
companies at the same FICO, they're
substantially cheaper. Plus, you get all
the money up front. It's that's
something I it's still very puzzling
that there is almost no marketing there.
You don't get marketed a lot on personal
lines of credit. And the people who
discover them do use them to consolidate
these debts and pay them off in one shot
at a lower interest rate. It's a very I
think very logical thing uh uh to do
that people don't do. But I mean just to
get back to I think we see over and over
and you're talking about BNPL and stuff.
This idea of how do you acquire
customers in what role the rate actually
has there is I just keep keep seeing it.
It's like a movie. I've seen this
before. Uh it's more effective at the
margin than than lowering the rates. And
it explains a lot I think of how the
finance sector interacts with retail
>> which is not just like cancelelling out.
So that's the issue. It's like, oh well,
they spend 5% of assets on marketing,
then they add 5% to the cost. I guess
there's no harm in that. Well, not
really, because what people have done is
paid the 5% in order to get the
marketing. So, if you really like the
commercials, you should be really happy.
But I don't think most people would sign
up for that.
>> I'm just I'm still stunned that the
advertising actually works cuz like I I
get the mail and I just throw it out
without looking at it. Maybe I should be
looking at it. On the disruption front,
you mentioned BNPL and we've done at
least one episode on it. we should
probably do more at some point. Is that
the big disruptor? You know, if they're
plugged into websites and some of them
are getting rewarded for being plugged
into those websites by retailers, then
they bypass the high acquisition costs
and presumably can still acquire
customers because you see them
everywhere online.
>> So, I I do think that has uh a lot to do
with what their angle is is it gets in
in front of you uh in that way. I
listened to a recent episode of yours. I
think you guys were talking about BNPL.
I assume I wasn't going back in to a
much earlier episode, but um I don't
think the economics of the BNPL beyond
that aspect of it are that different
from the credit cards, right?
>> Uh and there still is very high
operating and acquisition cost. If you
look at like BNPL companies, first most
of them don't really make money. And so
I think they're still in that stage
where they're building up to it. And you
mentioned Lending Club. Lending Club
didn't make money.
>> No. Uh,
>> no it did not.
>> It it didn't. So, because I think you
want to grab these juicy customers, but
they they respond to the marketing. So,
and just to go even back to that. So, so
AMX is one of it's really hard to find
aggregate marketing numbers across
companies, but from lists I've seen, AMX
might even be it's definitely I think a
top 10 marketer in the whole country. It
might even be in top five. I'm not sure.
along with some of the it spends over $6
billion a year on marketing and this is
not including the lounges and all this
which there's been like articles about
how everybody's like investing like
millions of dollars in these l that's
that's a separate category and Capital
One spends over $4 billion a year so I
looked it up and MX is bigger than Nike
and Coke in in in in marketing and you
think of like those being the ones that
are got to be like the gigantic ones and
Capital One's about as big
>> a personal line of credit This just like
a classic What is that product? I've
never looked into one of those.
>> I haven't seen
>> Is that an unsecured loan from a bank?
>> It's an unsecured loan,
>> but this is just like classic bank
borrowing. I go to the bank, I say, "Can
I borrow some money?"
>> Surprisingly, the the the the I mean,
you can you can look it up even like
like
>> it's so easy to to to look it up. They
offer It's a relatively large amount
compared to a credit card.
>> Yeah.
>> And you put in your your FICO, they give
you a rate. The rates almost for sure
always lower than the than the credit
card. I don't get it either, but you
know, I I you know, I had
>> one could use these to pay off
revolving.
>> That's mostly what people do, which they
should. I had a journalist ask me about
this and I was like,
>> this is a great idea. Like, I should
look this up and talk about this. I
mean, there's no, you know, how do you
explain this spread? I mean, I think
largely it is a it's it's got a lot of
this less of this retail focus to it.
But yeah, it's the same companies, too.
If you go to AMX, you can Amx line of
credit. Discover offers a Discover line
of credit, Capital One, Capital One line
of credit. It's the same thing. It's so
strange
>> this whole conversation
it edges into some frankly like slightly
uncomfortable territory in my opinion
because you right because especially
when you characterize something as like
you're kind of end up paying a lot for
them to advertise to you and you
apparently like the advertise
advertisement because that's you
responded to it etc. like you edge into
this territory where it's like these are
not like it must be the not the most
sophisticated base, right? Like it's
sort of I again I don't want it's like
the it's like why do Nigerian email
scams have all kinds of typos etc. And
the theory is because they want to
select for people
>> who will be foolish enough to respond to
them because if you go down the chain
they don't want you to be too savvy and
asking questions. So, like, let's just
get all the savvy customers out of the
way who would instantly recognize a scam
email and then you like get there. It's
right like
>> Are you saying that the Nigerian princes
don't pay you?
>> I'm just saying I think I might be in
trouble. Like it seems like there's a
filtration process going on where you
end up with this re the base of
revolvers where all this money is made
who are just clearly not that
financially safe because otherwise they
would be doing the personal line of
credit or not doing these things or
looking for that um looking for that
credit union credit card. Well, I I'll
say something about marketing in I mean
we all do respond
I know you guys are you guys are very
not elitist here very anti- elitist so
uh marketing is a just a huge industry
is as a finance person I'm like we do
have a marketing department at at the
business school and I'm like wow there's
a reason because you look at let's say
you look at alphabet and meta yeah
>> meta's revenues are almost 100% from um
I think there's you had a guest is also
talking about this kind of thing. So, uh
almost 100% from marketing and Google's
are like
>> close to 80%. We're talking hundreds of
billions of dollars a year and all the
very sophisticated stuff. And at the
end, it's sell you.
>> It works. It works. And I've I've
certainly been taken I get taken in by
marketing all the time. I I'll just say
one say one other thing is I think the
reason that because the the ROAS here
are high though the when we decompose
this at the end it sort of does most if
you take the alpha of this think of this
as alpha relative to the average bank
asset we get that it's about a percent
so how do you get down to a percent so
the risk premium here is quite big we
compare it to the risk premium on bonds
you have to compare it to high yield
corporate bonds and it looks similar for
all but the lowest FICO uh bonds versus
let's say triple C rated bonds where The
low FICO seems to have a big chunk o the
risk premium over and above the bonds.
I'd actually say the bonds look a little
low relative to that because it's the
risk premium on credit cards that kind
of rises linearly and it's the bonds
that kind of don't. But for the not so
bad credits, it's pretty similar risk
premium to high yield bond market. So
netsense doesn't look it's big or it
doesn't look crazy. Um but I should say
you know Goldman I think they when they
got before they got into credit cards
and it did not work out. So apparently
it's it is competitive in that sense. I
think they were eyeing this and saying
this is this is a good business. You see
the highest roses by far of all the you
know if you go look through the banks uh
10ks um you know some of them break this
out I think JP Morgan for example and
you see like that's got the highest ROE
by far that it's bigger than the you
know all the other parts of the bank. So
I think they were thinking that and we
got into it they paid very high
operating costs and had higher defaults
than than other ones. It didn't
obviously did not work out because they
they they they turned away from it. Do
you see any signs of rates eventually
coming down? It sounds like it's
probably not going to be through
competition or new entrance like fintex,
but could it be something like
regulation? I have vague memories of the
credit card act um doing something on
this front, but could it be something
like that?
>> The credit card act, there were tons of
papers on it when it came out. Mostly
limited your ability to increase rates
on existing borrowing.
>> Okay. and uh it it it sort of uh put
caps on all kinds of fees and charges
and then people were looking for whether
banks would move that to something else.
I think in the long run the answer is
yes. I don't know if they move that or
it's just something else but I mean so
far rates you could just plot it on on
Fred even though I think it's like a
little bit distorted. It's been going up
and up. I mean before it starts going
down it's got to stop going up. Uh so
they they're in a pretty strong position
but in in they there is this buy now pay
later they were lending club kind of
things although they largely crashed and
burned um and uh you know people
payments in general I mean you know
these companies for payments are huge
because there is this you know PayPal
all these guys this is just to take off
a little bit off the top of this swipe
fee and then we're going to get to to
the to the interest rates on this
borrowing. I mean I think that there is
constantly like movement in this space
but it has not been to drive down I
>> think it's driven up acquisition costs
more than it's driven down the actual
rates
>> unrelated macro question one of the
reasons I like your work you're sort of
revisiting some of these like basic
questions which I think is useful and of
course when we talked a couple years ago
it was like let's revisit some of what
we thought we knew about the 70s and see
if that inflation story is a little bit
different just on the big macro question
these days rates where they are
inflation sort of persistently warm a
lot of people like talk about our star
must be therefore higher than it
otherwise would have been what do you
think we've learned uh you know we had
this very fast rate hiking cycle 2021
through 2023 that almost I would say
many economists would have expected the
unemployment rate to rise a lot more
given that rate hike cycle it hasn't I
don't know
>> or spending to go down
>> yeah or spending to go down etc I'm I I
personally am rarely satisfied by the
stories that people tell about how in
fact those rate hikes translated into
lower inflation. Have you yourself sort
of learned anything interesting in the
last I don't know three or four years,
five years of this macro experiment that
we have post pandemic?
>> My inference I mean I think this is a
great topic and question. My my
inference was that um that the cycle I'm
in the group that thought that this was
largely supply shock issue that COVID
disrupted supply chains tremendously. I
mean we saw that and I think if you look
like the New York Fed has this uh you
know index that they put together on on
supply disruptions.
>> This predicted the trajectory of
inflation with a three-month lead very
well. I think we had a period where um
we saw that there was increased
employment and yet output was going
down. So usually when we talk about
productivity and things there's all
these compositional issues. Do you fire
the least productive people? So
productivity goes up for mechanical
reasons. But when you have more people
being employed and yet outputs going
down as it did for several quarters that
can't be the reason. So I took away from
it, you know, there's harsh arguments
about this that this was largely supply
driven and how it relates to the 70s.
Our argument there for different reasons
was that it was supply driven due to due
to credit crunches and things. So I tend
to think that a lot of the business
cycle things and and the inflations
we've seen like after wars were often
switching the kind of production that
you do which is a supply thing. I'm very
much in the in the supply camp and do
not think that I think the re the reason
that employment held up and spending
held up because I don't think that this
was happening through decreasing demand
and getting people fired and so forth. I
think it was products, you know,
components could ship again and so
people could be, you know, more
productive with the with the labor they
had. So to me, I'm I'm sure some people
very very highly disagree. To me, that
looked like a pretty clear story. So, if
you're Jerome Pal and you're worried
about inflation going up, and I should
just mention we are recording this on
>> October 29th.
>> Yeah. The day of the Fed disapply
expected to be a cut, right? But, you
know,
>> inflation's still, you know, somewhat
warm as Joe said.
>> If you're worried about it, should you
be looking at credit card rates versus,
you know, mortgage rates or benchmark
rates or things like that? How should
policymakers actually think about this
problem?
>> Between those I I think mortgage rates
that people, you know, do seem very much
to respond to. It is a a much bigger
amount. Maybe they're more
sophisticated, sensitive. It it lasts
with you for a long time. I mean, I
think that's much more important the
shifts in those spreads than uh for the
macro economy than well, the credit card
rates just not much movement. I mean,
they are literally tacked on top of the
Fed funds rate. So, that's completely
mechanical. didn't used to be the case
30 years ago, but ba basically just move
one for the spread will move one for one
with the Fed funds except when they
expand it by issuing new cards and
making rates higher. So, I think the
mortgage market is much more important
um for macro kind of stuff. I mean, I
don't envy, you know, Pal's job. It's a
very hard job now. I
>> Yeah.
>> Not sure.
>> Yeah. I last time I was at the Fed, I
was in the elevator when he got in, but
I didn't didn't want to bug him, so I
didn't say anything to him, but I I got
to see him in person.
>> Jerome, our star is fake. Um,
>> uh, you know, you're talking about
fintech, etc. I consider I personally
like I am actually think stable coins
are going to be a very big deal,
>> but I am actually not I do not
necessarily think they're going to be a
big deal for consumer transactions. It's
not obvious to me. Like my guess is that
they'll open up new transactions that we
aren't thinking of right now but not for
like buying coffee or buying you know
whatever. I'm curious but from your
research whether into cards etc. How
would that inform your or other uh
fintech how would that inform your
thinking about the trajectory of the
stable coin industry?
>> Yeah, stable coin it's interesting and I
I I you know I've heard you mention this
kind of view which I think is is not one
I'd considered. I I was thinking a lot
about consumers. Um I I'll say this, I
think to for me and some of the people I
talk to, my co-authors, stablecoin are
they're they're like a puzzle in the
sense that um maybe not all stable coin,
but the ones that have been around are
kind of like a money market fund that
doesn't pay you interest. That's how I
would summarize them because
>> uh and that's why I think um
>> uh you know uh these are some like the
most profitable companies ever per
employee because there's they don't do
anything. Yeah. So if you give them a
bunch of billion dollars, they just take
the whole interest.
>> There's some advertising there too, but
not a tremendous amount compared to
that. And people are happy with that. I
don't really get it. But uh you know,
now they've like you mentioned they've
started to to learn the sort of tricks
of the trade. they're going to do
rewards. It's better than paying people
actual interest. You give them rewards.
Um, so from the point of view of
consumers, I it is kind of a mystery. I
mean, I would love to start a money
market fund and not pay anybody any
interest. But economically, when you
don't pay any interest on a dollar ever,
you've taken the whole dollar. That's
what the dollar does. It pays you
interest. So the net present value of
all the interest of a dollar is the
dollar. So if they never pay you and you
stay there forever, then if they have $8
billion,
>> they've captured $8 billion.
>> Again, nice business if you can get it.
>> Yeah, it's a great business. It's it's
weird, but it's a great business.
>> What's your next research project?
>> So I think from um this credit card
stuff, there's there's definitely
interesting things to think about uh you
know, how people default and you know,
why how much this marketing stuff
affects them. from another point of view
is um uh so um one of my co-authors in
here, a former student of mine, uh we
have a bunch of uh work on you know
adjustable rate mortgages and why they
kind of disappeared. So they used to be
a big thing and they've kind of
disappeared and I think we kind of
understand why. So that's that's uh you
know there've been a lot of discussion
about that for mortgages. Why is the US
in one camp and many other countries in
another camp? But the US kind of used to
be in the adjustable mortgage rate camp
at least pre- crisis and stuff.
>> I remember um in when the rate hike when
we started surging there was this
popular theory that monetary policy
would have more teeth in countries like
Canada, Australia, the UK because so
many more households would be sens more
sensitive to faster resets.
>> Has that actually been borne out? It
sounds great as like a theory
intuitively that makes a lot of sense. I
do I guess Canadian unemployment has
trended higher than American but does
that but the inflation trajectories I
think have been roughly the same in uh
the those other angophone countries
versus the US where they had I don't
know like how strong effect was that do
you know
>> I don't know exactly but I don't get the
impression that it was tremendously
different I think it has impacted
consumers the one thing I should note
though is so you there's two senses in
which monetary policy can have uh an
effect one is that it makes people have
to spend a lot of money on that. So,
it's expensive for them.
>> But the other one is that here, and I
don't think that's the effect we were
going for, but people have just, you
know, stop taking out as many mortgages
and don't move. It was a negative
effect. I'm just not sure it's a
anti-inflationary effect. So, it's like
if you if you're going to have floating
rate stuff
>> and that's like the case with credit
cards and it shouldn't affect the volume
of it that much in terms of producing
it, but it's kind of people it's
expensive for them. And then on the
fixed rate one, they just stick to the
old stuff and we don't, you know,
mortgage credits really dried up in a
way. Uh but it's not affecting the the
existing borrowers only to the extent
that you don't want to move, which is
actually a big deal.
>> Amar Drexler, thank you so much for uh
coming back on OddLot. It's always a
treat. And next time you have a uh new
report out, let's talk let's talk arms
next time.
>> Okay, great. Thank you very much for
having me.
>> Tracy, I found that conversation to be
fascinating. I have to admit like yeah
like credit cards are the sort of black
box to me in many respects. I don't
really understand the business because I
don't actually use them for revolving
purposes or borrowing against them. I
don't think I quite realized how crazy
the numbers are. And I certainly knew
that there's tons of advertising
including direct mail and credit cards.
But the idea that this is so substantial
that a big part of what people are
paying for here is the advertising. Uh
that was all very novel to me. My big
takeaway from this is that, you know,
people I I guess are not rational, at
least when it comes to credit cards,
right? The marketing seems to work.
>> Yeah. No, totally. I'm not rational
because I don't take advantage of all
the points that I could and I don't like
optimize the way I could. And when I
like buy a plane ticket, only part of
the time do I think about is this the
airline?
>> Well, you could also argue that it's
rational to like factor in the time you
spend on doing this.
>> That's how I justify all of this money
left on the table by saying I make a
rational decision. is valuable.
>> Yeah, my time uh is valuable. It's but
you know if there are all these other
borrowing products out there that are
cheaper etc. It does feel like
>> someone must be able to come along and
make a product that is let's going to
compete on rate or you're going to be
able to borrow cheaper. I don't know
maybe BNPL will achieve that. I don't
know.
>> I'm going to go take out a personal
finance loan right now.
>> Go for it.
>> Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart.
>> For more OddLotss content, please check
out our daily newsletter. You can find
that at bloomberg.com/odotss.
>> We also have a Discord where you can
chat with fellow listeners.
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you like this conversation, then
please like or comment or better yet,
subscribe.
>> Thanks for listening.